Hello, everyone.
My name is Dane.
Thanks for coming to my talk.
How has everyone been enjoying the conference so far?
Has it been good?
I've been loving it.
So, today's the last day of the conference, and
we have heard a lot of really interesting talks from a lot
of different people over the past couple days.
And there's been some really interesting and weird references that have
been made, too, like some really cool ones.
Like we had Aaron yesterday talking about kelp.
We had Blaine talking about cheese making.
And then we had Lawrence talking about K-pop and the
K-pop fandom.
I just love that all these references happened at this conference so
far.
It especially makes me feel good because it makes what I'm
about to talk about seem not quite as crazy.
Because my talk is titled "From Toilets to Moss
: The Future of Social Media is Weird and Not for Everyone
." So, to kick things off, I want to introduce
myself a little bit for those who don't know me.
I am not Three Moss in a Trenchcoat, despite
what my bio on Blue Sky says, unfortunately, though sometimes
I wish that I was.
I was born and raised in Appalachia around the
exact same time that the World Wide Web came into existence.
So, I've kind of grown up alongside of the Web
and seen it grow as I have.
I am an artist, I'm a tech worker, and
I created the app Anasota, which some of you
may have seen or tried recently.
But my background is in communications, content, social media,
and things like that.
But I've been working in the decentralized Web space actually for
the past five years, before Blue Sky even existed.
I was Blue Sky user number 1216, so I've
been around in this community for quite some time.
I've had a few breaks here and there, but I
really sort of came back and became more active in 2024 again
and started making things on the App Protocol.
But as a result of my personal interests and professional obligations,
I have been relatively chronically online for various stretches of my
life.
And that has, along with the fact that I grew up
alongside the Internet, it's really caused me to both have
kind of a love-hate relationship with the Internet.
I love the Internet for, I love Twitter, I love
the old Internet, I loved all these different things.
But it's also been hard to watch how they've impacted
my life, both good and bad.
And it's also been hard watching Twitter die.
It's been hard watching so many things happen to so many
of these apps and websites that we love and sort of continually
getting worse and worse in a lot of ways.
But yeah, it has impacted me in amazing ways, though
.
Like, I've gotten multiple jobs just from being on Twitter
I met my partner online.
But yeah, it definitely had these negative impacts of impacting society
negatively, impacting my mental health negatively.
And I think what I ultimately realized as a result of all
that was that, yeah, these apps and a lot of
the web is not necessarily really built for me, necessarily for
anyone in particular.
It's often built for, you know, big tech shareholders
.
It's built for advertising.
It's built for extraction, all these different things.
And it's more like we, or at least me,
I've been able to make these things work in spite of
all these things.
But even then, there have been so many limitations.
As a result of this, I feel like there's a
temptation to look back, especially for folks like me who grew
up alongside the early internet, there's a temptation to look
back at it and be like, I wish we could go
back there.
I wish we could go and return to the past.
And I think that's like a very, I get that
sentiment.
But I also think that it's like, it's kind
of misguided and maybe even a little dangerous at times
of like, like we don't ultimately want to, I
don't think we should make, try to make the internet
great again.
I think that, I think, and if we can't
do that, and we shouldn't do it, at least
that mindset, I guess the question that emerges for me is
what should we do and what should that future look like?
And after working in the decentralized web space for the past five
years, it's definitely given me some ideas and thoughts about
what I think might be trying to emerge from this cocoon
.
And, and I say trying because I think despite like all
of our excitement about the atmosphere and the things that we're
building and creating here, none of it really is a guarantee
.
Like we're, we're sort of right now trying to
make this thing happen.
And it's uncertain, it's uncertain if it will happen
or not.
And I think it's important to keep that in mind.
Cause it's going to take a lot of work.
But it's kind of like, you know, if some
of you may have followed me and, and watch some of
my live streams on stream place last year, I was,
I was raising monarch butterflies and I was streaming that.
And you could see the butterflies emerging for their cocoons and
all the chrysalises.
Um, and, but the reality is some of them didn
't make it, you know, like I had, I
think 12 different butterflies and I think four or five of them
didn't make it.
Um, yes.
I mean, in the same way, like this, uh
, what we're doing here, uh, it's not
guaranteed to succeed.
Uh, we've made a lot of progress, I think
over the past, I mean, even the past six months
, it's been pretty cool to see what's been happening
and the number of people that are here today.
Um, but, uh, so let's, let's
, let's dive a little bit more.
I just realized I forgot to advance my slides here.
Um, let's, let's dive a little bit more
into what the future might look like through the lens of some
of the things that I've been working on in the atmosphere
over the past 12 months.
Um, so to get started, uh, the very first
thing I made was in 2024, it was literally a simple
tool I built just for me, uh, to go through
my, my post archive and choose whether I wanted to keep
something or delete something and sort of like that KonMari
fashion.
Um, and this very much was, well, I have
some, well, I have some background in doing some software
stuff and like, um, you know, making websites and
HTML and CSS.
I had never actually made a web app before.
So this was like the first thing I ever did in that
vein.
Um, and it was here in the atmosphere.
Uh, the second thing I did was this platform called cred
.
blue.
It was kind of a weird, fun experiment in understanding the
data model of the app protocol better, understanding what was possible
, just like testing things and seeing what would happen.
And it was just a way to like create a, a
, a social score based on someone's profile.
Um, so that was, that was the second thing I
made.
Uh, the next thing I made was this, uh,
more of an art project and creative thing.
It was a dynamic avatar that runs off of my iPhone.
And what happens is every day, every hour, my avatar
automatically updates to match the, sort of the way the sky
, the sky gradient looks, um, wherever I am in
my local time.
So if you've seen my, if you see my avatar
on the feed and you've seen that changes colors, that
's, that's exactly what it's doing.
It's been doing that now for, I guess, over
a year.
It's been running nonstop right off my iPhone.
Um, and then after that I made this weird thing called
flushes.
Uh, this happened about a year ago.
Uh, right around, I think exactly coinciding with last
year's conference.
Um, it was basically an experiment to try to figure out
one, how do I make an app view?
I've never made an app view.
I don't even really know what an app view is.
Um, so it was better, it was going one step
further and learning more about, uh, the app protocol.
And honestly asking this question of what, can, can,
can you easily make a new social network or a social platform
really easily?
And how quickly can you do that?
And this was made in like two days and, you know
, it, it went kind of like, uh, viral
within the atmosphere community and people started posting and using it a
bunch the first few days.
Um, it was just interesting to see what, what happened
there.
And it, but it taught me a lot about, uh
, I guess what was possible.
Um, and then after that, I, uh, I
, I decided to move on to something a bit more serious
.
I wanted to, um, I wanted to start creating more
serious projects in the atmosphere.
And I thought, what, what better way to do that
than create some sort of umbrella brand, which I can funnel
all my projects through.
Um, so I made something even more serious.
I made an app potato mascot, um, which is this
little guy.
Uh, I designed him and put him all over the place
.
There's lots of stickers.
I'm sure you've seen some out in the, you
know, there's probably lots more out there if you want
one.
Um, uh, and this is just, this is,
this is kind of what I feel like sometimes.
It's like, you know, as an artist or a
communicator and more technical spaces, uh, I feel a
little out of my depth.
Uh, but, uh, finally, I just wanna move
on to the last thing, sort of the most recent thing
that I've made.
And I've been working on a lot, um, is
this app, uh, called Anasota, which is
, uh, it started as a blue sky client, a
very unique blue sky client.
I call it a, a new, more peaceful, uh
, social interface that helps you be offline more and online better
.
And, uh, Anasota was really asking the questions
of what social media might could look like if I tried,
like, rethinking things from the ground up from a more
, like, artsy, creative perspective.
Um, and it, it all started, uh, literally
, I guess I had this idea, I guess a little
over a year ago.
I posted this on blue sky, I said, we need
an extremely weird and avant-garde blue sky client,
and I think I'm gonna have to build it myself.
Uh, so when I started working on it, I started
brainstorming ideas and wondering what, what could I, what
direction could I take this in?
And, and what should I call it?
And all these different things.
And I started looking to other areas of my life for inspiration
, and, uh, one of those areas was, uh
, my more recent interest in going mothing and, uh
, learning about moths.
Uh, so, so during the warmer months, I've
started going out into my yard and other places and taking lights
and cameras with me and creating these light traps that moss will
be attracted to at night.
Um, it usually ranges from, like, starting at,
like, 10 p.
m.
and going into, like, 3 a.
at night.
Um, but I'll, yeah, set up my cameras
and all that kind of stuff and document them and just learn
about moss.
And, uh, yeah, now I've, I've
, I've seen so many different types of moths just
in my backyard.
It's really incredible to see the range and diversity of what
you can see in your backyard.
Um, so from there, I started thinking, what,
uh, what could I name my app?
And I really started honing in on moths.
And this is the Anasota moth.
This is an oakworm moth by its more common name
.
And this, this particular photo is a photo I took.
This is a moth that showed up on my front door
one day.
I woke up, I went outside, and this was on
my door.
I'd never seen one before.
It has these two little white dots, and it's very
orange.
It's very cute and fuzzy.
I just fell in love with it.
It's probably my favorite moth now.
And so I was like, that's it.
That's what I'm gonna call the app.
Um, and so I started really going deep into moths
and learning all about them and all these different things.
And this is what Anasota looks like, the app
.
Um, this is the interface for it.
A very different kind of client.
Um, this is all blue sky data, though.
This is pulling in from people's blue sky accounts.
These are posts from blue sky.
But what you're looking at here in particular is this is
what someone's profile looks like in Anasota.
Anasota is, is not, is taking away the
idea of infinite scrolling feeds.
You don't really scroll through posts in Anasota.
It's a card deck that you swipe through and you look
at posts one by one.
What you're saying right here is this is a profile page
and the first card at the very top of the deck is
representative of the person's profile.
And then as you swipe, you see posts one by one
from that person based on recency and things like that.
Um, other cool things about Anasota.
Uh, you actually can discover moths in the app as
you're browsing and swiping through posts.
You'll randomly discover a new moth and these moths
and moth data and images are pulled in via the i
Naturalist API.
Which is, I use iNaturalist, uh,
when I started going mothing, I would start cataloging
all the moths that I found using iNaturalist
.
And I thought what better way to introduce that more into the
app than using their free open API.
And it's really easy and incredible to use.
Um, other interesting things about Anasota that make it
a little bit different are, um, a variety of different
features.
Like we have, we now have this forest map, um
, every time you, every time going into Anasota
and browsing your social media feed, it's an expedition to
a forest.
And it maps out your expedition.
You'll see points on this topographic map where the fog
of war, and you'll see moments where you've discovered
moths or pick up items or things like that.
Um, we have waypoints, which is this feature that
I concocted.
As more and more blue skies, blue sky clients and apps
and atmosphere things started emerging, people wanted ways to be able
to hop between them.
So in Anasota, you can quickly tap at the
corner of a top of a card and jump into that post
and see it on blue sky or black sky or red dwarf
or any of these other clients.
Um, notifications are really great in, in Anasota
.
It's, uh, there's lots of cool features like
bashing notifications, highlights, there's all sorts of things
like that.
It makes them more digestible.
Um, there's a cool onboarding experience now with,
that sets sort of a tone and does some storytelling and,
and grants you some initial items to use in your journey if
you choose the story mode of the app.
Um, and this is an example of, uh, what
posts look like.
So on the left you have a post in blue sky and
then on the right you have the exact same post but in
Anasota.
Um, blue sky obviously is a more traditional Twitter style client
.
It has a lot of things going on here.
It's got lots of icons, lots of numbers, um
, and it's within the context of a feed of tons
of other posts as you're scrolling and scrolling and scrolling.
Um, whereas in Anasota it's, it's
, it's a bit more minimal.
Um, and then in the bottom right instead of, uh
, engagement metric numbers there is a rarity card.
Um, that is similar, it takes inspiration for like trading
cards that have rarity icons.
It basically is just a calculation or like a simple algorithm that
abstracts all the engagement metrics and displays them as a r
arity icon that you can familiarize yourself with.
So you can start getting a sense for how engaged a post
is without actually having to like see all that data and numbers
right there in front of you.
But you can hover over the rarity icon and see the
actual numbers or flip the card on the back.
You can flip cards over to see more things like those engagements
or details.
And then last thing we did, um, at the end
of last year was, uh, sort of like a,
uh, Spotify wrap type experience within, within Anasota
using the sort of Anasota theme.
Um, that basically recaps people's year on blue sky
.
It pulls in, they can search their account.
It pulls in all their data and it, it creates these
, you know, cool visualizations and analysis.
It shows you like the top words that you use that year
, top connections or the people that you engage with the most
things like that.
Um, I think, I think when it initially launched and
was shared, it ended up being used, I think by
like 50,000 unique people.
It was really cool to see it spreading around the community.
Um, so yeah, these are some of the things that
I've like, I've been working on and making in
the atmosphere.
And they've taught me a lot.
And I, I think there's some ideas and themes that
emerged, um, that I want to share and talk about
, uh, that are basically lessons of what I think potentially
might happen in the future.
Or it might is already happening.
Um, uh, let's see, let me scroll down
through my notes.
Um, so first of all, um, the future is
decentralized, right?
Do we think that's true?
Um, so I've been working in the open web,
like I said, for around five years now.
And when I got here, like that was the theme is
decentralization is the answer.
This is the key.
This is the thing we're trying to do here.
Um, and it makes sense, uh, initially.
Um, I still believe that it is somewhat true.
Um, but I also think that it's a little misleading
.
Um, I think that it's actually kind of the wrong
goal.
Um, it's, uh, it's, it's
not really much to be chased after in and of itself.
It's something that we're doing and using a quality that
we're trying to use to obtain a specific goal or state
.
Um, but it's also kind of an illusion because,
um, it's a very ambiguous word that has so many
different meanings in different contexts, in different perspectives.
And there's questions of is the atmosphere decentralized?
Is activity pub decentralized?
What about Noster?
And all these different things.
Um, and there's so many criteria which you can measure
that by.
Um, and it ends up just becoming debates that we have
endlessly on blue sky.
I'm sure many of you probably, I know I have
participated in some of those debates.
Um, but it's, it's an illusion in the
sense that no matter how decentralized you think you can make something
, ultimately there's always something underneath.
That is not decentralized.
That you can't really escape.
Uh, if, if Noster, if Atmosphere
, all these different things are fully decentralized in this utopic
way.
Uh, at the end of the day, there's,
uh, an internet service provider that can shut off your access
to the internet.
A government that can shut off your access to the government.
And at that point, it's like, well, it
doesn't really matter.
Um, but also, it, there's a tendency with
, uh, decentralization to think that, oh, I
can separate myself from everyone else.
I can become independent.
I can control things.
I can do what I want.
I can, yeah, all these different things.
But ultimately, it's, um, we tend to forget
just how, or even aware of just how, like,
interconnected everything really is.
Um, there's this great term, uh, by a
Vietnamese Buddhist monk, uh, I mean, Thich N
hat Hanh.
Uh, he coined this term interbeing.
And it's really about this idea of, like, focusing
and trying to better understand and be aware of just how our
, our existence is so intertwined with everything else.
Um, and it's just not really actually possible to,
like, separate ourselves, uh, fully.
Um, so I like to keep that in mind.
Um, and I think that it can potentially help us ref
ocus to maybe some going beyond decentralization.
Maybe we don't want to lose that phrase completely, but
what a lot of people are trying to ask when they're
thinking about these things and users are asking or feeling is these
questions of, like, can I leave this thing?
Can I, can I build something here?
Can I, can I make this my own?
Um, and I think words and concepts like interoperability
, autonomy, and malleability are actually a lot more
helpful, potentially, because there's lots of ways that you
can achieve those things.
Um, and malleability, specifically, is one I
really love.
And it's funny, because I was, as I was
preparing this talk, I, of course, had no idea
what Jay was going to announce the other, you know,
just yesterday or what she was planning.
But it does really fit into what I had planned to talk
about.
There's this, uh, really great, uh, essay
by Ink and Switch, uh, that they released, I
forget, maybe sometime last year, called Malleable Software
.
And I love this essay.
Um, it's very long, but it has some great
quotes, like this one.
Um, the original promise of personal computing was a new kind
of clay, a malleable material that users could res
hape at will, but instead we got appliances built far away
, sealed, and unchangeable.
Um, and for me, this, I don't know
, this really resonates.
And this makes me feel like, yeah, this is an
apt description of what happened.
Um, and I do think that as a result of some
things that, some new technologies and communities that are evolving now
and converging, I think that it makes some malle
able software much more of a potential reality than it ever has
been in the past.
Um, specifically, I think that the atmosphere we're participating
in here with the app protocol, combined with what some of
what Jay was talking about, these sort of agentic workflows
with LLMs, they really can begin to bring down
a lot of barriers to entry and allow people who previously probably
wouldn't have tried or attempted to make their, their,
their digital environments their own or make software experiences themselves.
Um, it makes it, um, yeah, it makes
it a lot more possible.
Um, you know, the atmosphere gives people, like,
a foundation that they can easily take and build upon.
It gives you a social graph, it gives you pre-
existing content, it gives you identities, um, that you
don't have to rebuild from scratch.
It would, it's make, it, it's what
makes, uh, something like Flushes possible that I
could do in two, two days.
Um, uh, another great quote from that essay that I
want to highlight is this one.
It says, "Everyone deserves the right to evolve their digital
environments.
It's an important way to fulfill our creative potential and maintain
a sense of agency in a world that is increasingly defined in
code." Um, and I think this is really what I
've been trying to do and what I think the atmosphere has
helped enable me to do, is it's allowed someone like
me who does not have necessarily the resources, the ability to
create an entirely new social network myself, but it allows me
to engage with that digital environment in a way that feels more
at home to me or fits better with my own needs and
style.
Um, this brings me to, like, the second,
the second point I want to talk about, which is this
idea that I have of the client being the content.
And I'm sure many of you reference, understand this reference
, which is a, uh, a remix of a quote
by Marshall McLuhan back in the '60s with his
book, "The Medium is the Message." Um, and
to tie this a little bit back into moths, um
, moths are interesting for a lot of reasons, but
they're very different, obviously, from many other creatures and
even, obviously, humans.
Um, moths have, uh, you know, compound
eyes that I think range from anywhere from, like, 200
to 200,000, uh, 20,000 facets.
Um, their, uh, antennae are incredibly sensitive.
Uh, they can detect chemicals and things within the air.
Um, and they help them fly.
They have, uh, hearing organs, which are kind of
like ears, but not quite like ears.
But they can detect, like, ultrasonic frequencies.
Um, so they're, they have these, like,
sensory organs that allow them to experience the world in a unique
way.
Um, and there's this term called, I think it
's pronounced umwelt.
It's a, it's based on a German word,
I believe.
Um, but it means the specific way in which an organism
, which organisms of a particular species perceive and experience the world
, shaped by the capabilities of their sensory organs and perceptual
systems.
So, I think that, uh, this is very,
uh, apt for what we're experiencing now in this era
of malleable software that is coming into existence.
Um, because previously, uh, previously in the old era
of social media, we had, uh, things like Facebook
, which was one user interface designed in Silicon Valley by,
you know, tech giants and things like this, serving billions
of people all over the world from different communities and contexts with
different needs and wants and desires.
And it was basically kind of forcing them to experience the digital
world in this one particular way.
Um, and then I think a good example of this is
going back to this is there's two different ways that you
can view data.
Or there's not just two, these are just two examples
of ways you can view data.
Um, the same underlying data.
Um, and I think what I ultimately think and hope and
I think is going to happen is potentially we might see,
again, to drop back to moths and the animal kingdom
is potentially a world in which there are so many different types
of, uh, of clients that maybe they're forks
of one client and they go off in one direction and they
're very similar.
Um, you know, the Anasota moth has
, I think there's like seven or eight different, um
, species of Anasota moths that all have slightly
different variations.
So, you know, you have forks of the blue
sky client now that people can easily fork it and change it
to be different colors or add new features that aren't in
the official client and things like this.
So I think we could easily see a world in which you
could almost like have a taxonomy of client interfaces for the
atmosphere.
Um, and in the same way, like again, moss
, there are moss and butterflies are within the same, uh
, order.
It's the order of Lepidoptera.
And, uh, moss, there are like 180,000
known species of moss, but only like around 20,000
known species of butterflies.
Um, and even within all those different things, there's
just an incredible diversity.
Like these are all photos that I took in my yard.
Um, and it is, I don't know, it
's very stunning to see the differences.
Um, but all this comes back to like this idea of
, yes, uh, Facebook is one social client designed in
a very particular way, trying to serve three billion people.
And I don't think that makes sense and isn't very
healthy.
Um, but with things like Anasota and other clients
that are popping up, uh, uh, the goal for
these things and at least for me when I'm designing An
asota is to make it not for everyone, but to
make it for a very particular type of person.
Um, Anasota is definitely not for everyone.
Like, uh, there's lots of people that love what
I'm doing and love, you know, the thing that
I've made, but might not necessarily even use it themselves
.
Um, and that's fine.
Like I, I know that's gonna be the case and
I didn't, you know, design it for everyone and
that's the case.
Um, same could be true of, uh, if some
of y'all heard Maria's talk, she was talking
about Leah, which is the client that she and Eugene are
making for researchers.
And it's incredibly different.
It's not a client that I would use every day,
but it's specific to their community with features that they need
and want that other major apps would not even do.
Um, and this really, uh, leads sort of to
like one of my final points, which is, uh,
abandoning the idea of one size fits all, one size
fits all software, especially in contrast to, you know,
Elon Musk's vision of the everything app.
One app that does everything for everyone.
Um, I think it was several months ago, I,
I posted on blue sky, something to the effect of like
, uh, we don't need an everything app and the
atmosphere can be an everything ecosystem.
And so like, that's, that's kind of like
the thing that is attracted me to the, to the ecosystem
.
And is my hope for like what this whole thing could become
if we're able to make it work.
Um, to close it off, uh, there's some
interesting parallels.
Um, one of which is just this idea that moss are
attracted to light and we, people actually don't, aren
't really quite certain why that is.
There are like theories about why moss are attracted to lights.
Um, but it's, there's no strong conclusions necessarily
about that.
Um, and now humans somehow are also attracted to these weird
screens and lights that are drawing us in and we spend hours
in front of and, um, when we don't really
know quite what they're doing to us.
Like this is only, we've only been doing this for
like 20 years, which is not very long whatsoever when you
think about the grand scheme of things.
Um, so we don't really know what's happening exactly
.
Um, but I think in that environment it's incredibly important
that if we don't know exactly what's happening or where
this is going, we want people I think to be able
to, to control things themselves or at least adapt things to
make them fit their own, um, their own needs,
wants and desires and even styles.
Um, and to close things out, I just, I
'm going to show you one more picture of how amazing and
diverse moss can be.
These are all moss that I found in my backyard late at
night.
Um, yeah, so many different kinds.
Um, they're incredible and beautiful.
I know some folks might be scared of moss or think they
're weird and creepy or whatever, but some of them are
, but they're also just incredibly beautiful ones.
Um, yeah.
So that's, uh, that's what I get out
of that atmosphere and that's what I hope more folks get
out of the atmosphere.
Um, yeah.
Thank you so much, Dame.
Uh, we've got time for maybe one question.
Does anyone have a question?
How many different types of moss have you seen?
I think?
Oh.
I can't remember exactly.
I think I've seen, I've only been doing it
for now, I guess a year and a half.
I think I'm up to around 100 different moths.
But they're, I've heard mothers, uh,
that you can see up to a thousand.
And depending on your location.
So, I'm going to be doing it from here on
out and seeing how far we can go.
Um, yeah.
Yeah.
I can't remember exactly.
I think I've seen, I've only been doing it
for now, I guess a year and a half.
I think I'm up to around 100 different moths.
But there, I've heard mothers, uh, that
you can see up to a thousand.
And depending on your location.
So, I'm going to be doing it from here on
out and seeing how far we can go.
Follow, follow up question.
Did you see any moths here?
In, in Vancouver?
Not yet.
Uh, not yet.
But I, I was a very strong temptation to bring some
of my portable gear and like go out at night.
But I was like, I can't do that.
I've got to be like focused on talks and things like
that.
But I really wanted to.
I was like, oh my, there's so many cool
moths out here.
I was very jealous.
And yeah.
But that's, yeah.
Thank you so much.
Uh, one more round of applause for Dame, please.